GRADE 5
Early Start
Mara woke up with a start. “Oh no!” The sun was shining brightly on her face. She looked at
her alarm clock. She was not going to make it to school. She hurriedly put on her uniform,
gathered her things and dumped them into her bag. She rushed so that she could be in
school before the bell rang. As she was going out the door, her mother stopped her and
asked, “Why are you rushing? Did you forget? It’s Saturday today!
Rice for Lunch
Anika washed the rice grains. Then she put them into a pot. She also put in two cups of
water. Finally, she covered the pot and left it on the electric stove. After twenty minutes,
she went to check on the pot. It was not hot. She saw that the plug was still on the floor.
Anika looked at the clock and shook her head. It was almost lunchtime.
The Gift
The colorfully-wrapped box was lying on the table when Mario got home. Thinking that it
was his parents’ birthday gift to him, he took it and quickly tore it open. It was the coolest
looking pair of shoes he had ever seen. Mario put them on, walked out into the street and
jumped into a puddle. “Mario, why are you wearing your brother’s shoes?” his Mother cried.
When he looked down, he said, “Oh no, that’s a lot of cleaning I have to do.
One Stormy Night
That night, Jessica helped her mother close the windows. The wind was howling. Droplets
of rain started pelting the roof. “Go find the candles and I will get the matches,” said her
mother. Lightning flashed. A clap of thunder followed. Soon after, the lights went off. “A
blackout!” shouted Jessica. “Don’t be alarmed. It’s a good thing we have what we need,”
said mother
Frog’s Lunch
One day, a frog sat on a lily pad, still as a rock. A fish swam by. “Hello, Mr. Frog! What are
you waiting for?” “I am waiting for my lunch,” said the frog. “Oh, good luck!” said the fish
and swam away. Then, a duck waddled by. “Hello, Mr. Frog! What are you waiting for?” “I
am waiting for my lunch,” said the frog. “Oh, good luck!” said the duck and waddled away.
Then a bug came buzzing by. “Hello, Mr. Frog! What are you doing?” asked the bug. “I’m
having my lunch! Slurp!” said the frog. Mr. Frog smiled.
THE COW AND THE CARABAO
Long ago, a farmer had a carabao and a cow. The carabao was bigger but the cow worked
just as hard. One day the farmer said, “I can get more from my farm if my carabao works all
day and my cow works all night.” This went on for a month 'til finally, the carabao cried, “It is
just too hot to work all day!” “Want to go for a swim?” asked the cow. “It will cool you off.”
The carabao happily agreed. They went off without the farmer’s consent. Before swimming,
they hung their skins on a tree branch. But it wasn’t long till the farmer went looking for
them. Upon seeing the farmer, they rushed to put on their skins. In their rush, the carabao
had worn the cow’s skin and the cow had worn the carabao’s skin. From then on, cows
have sagging skin while carabaos have tight skin.
PEDRITO’S SNACK
The bell rang. “It’s snack time!” Pedrito shouted and ran out of the room. He sat on a bench
under a tall tree. In Pedrito’s lunch bag were three soft buns. He got the first one and took a
bite. “Mmmm,” said Pedrito. Just then, a sparrow sat on the bench. It was looking at him.
Pedrito didn’t mind. He went on and finished his bun. Then Pedrito got his second bun. He
took a big bite and said “Mmmm!” The sparrow was still looking at him. It also moved
closer. But still, Pedrito did not mind. He went on and finished his bun. Finally, Pedrito got
his last bun. He was about to take a bite when the sparrow flew up to his shoulder. Pedrito
smiled, cut the bun in two and said to himself, “I think someone also likes bread and
butter.”
AMY’S GOOD DEED
Amy loves walking home from school to see the colors of the leaves and listen to the birds
sing. But one day, she heard a soft cry. It came from under a bush. “Should I go near?” Amy
wondered. As it grew louder, Amy decided she must help the poor thing. Amy crept closer
and held her arm out. Just when she was about to reach out, she saw a pair of eyes and
heard a loud “Hissss!!!!” She also felt a sharp pain. “Ouch!” Amy cried. Her arm had four
long scratch marks. Amy was upset. She really thought she was doing a good deed.
THE SNAIL WITH THE BIGGEST HOUSE
A little snail told his father, “I want to have the biggest house.” “Keep your house light and
easy to carry,” said his father. But, the snail ate a lot until his house grew enormous. “You
now have the biggest house,” said the snails. After a while, the snails have eaten all the
grass in the farm. They decided to move to another place. “Help! I cannot move,” said the
snail with the biggest house. The snails tried to help but the house was too heavy. So the
snail with the biggest house was left behind.
The Great Runner
Atalanta is a lovely princess and a great runner. One day, her father told her, “It’s time you
get married.” “I will marry a man who will beat me in a race,” replied Atalanta. Many young
men tried their luck. But they all lost. Hippomenes asked the goddess of love for help.
“Here are three golden apples,” she said. “During the race, throw one apple in front of
Atalanta. She will stop to pick it up. That should slow her down.” Hippomenes heeded her
advice and won the race. Thus, Atalanta became his wife.
TRADING PLACES
On a trip to a university, the driver told the professor, “I’ve heard you give this speech many
times. I can deliver it for you.” The professor said, “The people in this university haven’t
seen me yet. Give the lecture. I’ll pretend to be your driver.” When they arrived, the driver
was introduced to be the professor. He gave an excellent speech. Everybody applauded.
Afterwards, somebody asked a question which the driver could’t answer. In order to get out
of the sticky situation, he said, “Oh, that’s such an easy question. Even my driver can give
you the answer!
THE LEGEND OF THE FIREFLY
There was a time when young and old stars could talk to Bathala. One day, the young stars
learned that they become part of a black hole when they grow old. The young stars feared
losing their light. They asked Bathala for help. “I have a solution. But you have to give up a
lot,” said Bathala. “You need to leave the heavens and live on land.” Some of the younger
stars agreed. On a dark night, you might chance upon these stars. They have turned into
tiny twinkling bugs whose tails flicker as they fly from place to place.
GRADE 6
Chameleons
Chameleons are extraordinary animals. They are one of the few animals that can change
their color. This is their way of hiding themselves. Chameleons that live in trees are often
green. Those that live in desert lands are usually brown. It is also their way of keeping
warm. Turning a darker shade helps them absorb more heat. They also change colors to
send messages to other chameleons. Their bright colors may attract another chameleon or
warn enemies.
The Philippine Eagle
The Philippine Eagle has replaced the maya as our national bird. It is one of the three
largest and strongest eagles in the world. But it is in danger of extinction. Hunting and
deforestation have caused the number of Philippine Eagles to dwindle. Scientists have
tried to increase their number by breeding them in captivity. The first eagle to be bred in
captivity is Pag-asa. At 25 years old, Pag-asa is not yet suited to be released to the wild as
she has developed dependency on her human keeper.
Home to Millions of Fish
Coral reefs are found in shallow areas of tropical ocean waters. They are like beautiful
underground gardens that grow in salty waters. Millions of fish and sea plants make their
home in the reefs as these provide a safe sanctuary for them. They allow small fish to hide
from large predator fish. But many coral reefs are in trouble. Water pollution is destroying
many reefs. Tourism likewise harms them. If reefs are damaged, we will lose many of our
most beautiful fish.
YAWNING
What makes us yawn? Yawning is something that we cannot control. Even in the mother’s
womb, eleven-week-old babies have been observed to yawn. But why do we do it? One
popular explanation for yawning is that a person may be tired or bored. Although many
believe this to be true, it cannot explain why athletes yawn before an event or why dogs
yawn before an attack. It is said that yawning is caused by a lack of oxygen and excess
carbon dioxide. A good example of this is when we yawn in groups. We yawn because we
are competing for air. Others even believe that we yawn to cool our brains off. Cool brains
allow us to think more clearly so yawning is said to help us become more alert.
LAUGHTER
People love to laugh. We love it so much when there are jokes, jobs, and shows that are
made to make us laugh. Even though laughing seems natural, not many species are able to
do so. Laughing involves the performance of rhythmic, involuntary movements, and the
production of sounds. We are able to laugh using fifteen facial muscles, our respiratory
system, and sometimes even our tear ducts. We are lucky that we are able to laugh
because there is strong evidence that laughter can help improve health. Laughter boosts
the immune system and adds another layer of protection from disease. Since laughter also
increases blood flow, it improves the function of blood vessels that helps protect the heart.
Laughter also relaxes the whole body by relieving tension and stress. Finally, laughter also
brings out the body’s natural feel-good chemicals that promote well-being.
EFFECTS OF ANGER
Anger is often viewed as harmful. It does not only affect the person feeling this anger but
those around him or her. As these feelings get stronger, changes occur in our body. Our
faces turn red and carry a frown. Our teeth are clenched and our hands are closed tight.
Our breathing becomes heavy and this makes our heart beat faster. Our shoulder and neck
muscles become stiff and our blood pressure begins to rise. All these things happen
because our body is preparing for something. It is preparing for action. However, this action
does not have to be harmful. People are often guilty about feeling angry. But, anger can be
viewed positively. Feelings of anger tell you that something is not right and that something
needs to change. The challenge lies in making sure that actions resulting from anger will
help rather than harm. Expressing our feelings can help others understand the source of
our anger rather than fear its consequences.
DREAMS
We often say “Sweet dreams,” but have you ever wondered why we dream? Some say that
dreaming is our brain’s way of exercising. While we sleep, our brain may be testing the
connections and pathways to see if they are working well. Others believe that dreaming is
our brain’s way of sorting out problems. Problems that have not been addressed during the
day are sometimes resolved in our sleep. Yet another explanation is that dreaming is our
brain’s way of fixing and organizing all the information we have. While sleeping, our brains
have a chance to sort out the information that we want to keep from the stuff we no longer
want. Still another idea is that dreams are just another form of thinking. Will we ever get to
know the answer to this question? Maybe we should sleep on it.
ROCKS FROM OUTER SPACE
The pieces of rocks that come from outer space have three names: meteor, meteorite, and
meteoroid. A meteoroid is a piece of matter moving in space. It moves as fast as 40 miles a
second. It may be large or small. Most meteoroids are smaller than a grain of sand. As a
meteoroid comes into the air near the earth, it catches fire. Most meteoroids burn up
before they hit the earth. The flash of light from the burning meteoroid is called a meteor. If
a piece of meteoroid falls to the ground, it is called a meteorite. People have studied these
rocks for many years. They wanted to research ways to keep meteoroids from making holes
in spacecrafts. Thick walls may help. Or perhaps spacecrafts can be covered with a metal
skin that will seal itself.
Bettles
Beetles can adapt to any kind of environment. They can be found crawling, burrowing,
flying, and swimming on every part of the earth except the ocean. Why do beetles survive
well on our planet? First, they have tough compact bodies. These help them hide, find food,
and lay eggs in places where other insects could never go. Almost all beetles have tough
front wings which are colorful and carry beautiful patterns. These wings also act as suit of
armor to protect the beetles’ transparent hind wings which are used for flying. Beetles have
mouth parts designed for chewing different food. They eat other insects, animal dung, and
even cloth. They also feed on the bark, leaves, flowers, and fruits of any kind of plant. They
can even chew around the stems of poisonous plants to let the deadly sap drain
JUST HOW FAST
Many things around us move at different rates. Glaciers, which are frozen rivers of snow,
move less than one foot in a day. A box turtle travels about ten feet per minute, while a snail
travels five inches per hour. A chimney swift flies almost ninety miles per hour. This is the
fastest speed recorded for any living creature. A hydroplane skims across the top of the
water at nearly 300 miles an hour. Some racing cars travel more than 500 miles per hour.
The wind in a tornado may move at 600 miles per hour but sound waves are faster with a
speed of up to 740 miles per hour. The Earth moves around the sun at 67,000 miles per
hour. At 186,000 miles per second, light is faster! Science has yet to discover anything that
would surpass this speed.
FLYING ROCKS
There are rocks in our Solar System that never flocked together to form planets. Larger ones
called asteroids gather in the Asteroid Belt, a strip found between Mars and Jupiter. Some
asteroids don’t move along this belt but have paths that bring them close to the earth.
These are called Apollo Asteroids. There may be half a million asteroids whose diameters
are bigger than one kilometer. The largest asteroid is over 1000 kilometers across. It is
speculated that many asteroids were once larger but they collided with each other and
became small fragments. Unlike asteroids, meteoroids are small rocky bodies, that are
scattered in space and do not orbit the sun. They cross the Earth’s orbit and are often seen
burning up in the Earth’s atmosphere at night. The faint flashes of light they make are called
shooting stars.
